Fiction Teachers, what is it called, Seminar, Institute at the University of
Kansas. And James Gunn was one of the ... Oh, here's Jim Bain, raise your hand.
She's gonna tell you a little bit about the history of the play. She's one of
the authors of it. And then I'm going to introduce the cast, and we're going to
get started.
This summer at the third annual Intensive English Institute on the Teaching of
Science Fiction. And if you think the title was bad, you should have been at the
course. We went to class from 9 o'clock in the morning until 9 o'clock in the
evening for three weeks. And we got a little crazy. Like this t-shirt. And like
this story. Two of the books on the reading list were James Gunn's The Road to
Science Fiction 1 and 2. And when it came time to title our story, it seemed
perfectly natural to just extend his metaphor. Because this story really is
stuck on the shoulder of the road. We also of course had to include Jim Gunn's
campus in the story. as well as set it in Kansas where the class took place. And
also Steve Goldman was one of the teachers besides Jim Gunn and they spent three
weeks debating whether or not JG Ballard wrote science fiction.
Naturally, we got tired of hearing it so JG Ballard became our villain and the
debate was the subject of our story. We also got a little crazy with the
punning.
That's it. Stuck on the shoulder of the road to science fiction. In case you
were wondering, the frisking at the door was to make sure none of you were
carrying anything throwable.
Both of them. From that side to this in the cast, we have beautiful but
dumb, who is Cliff Flint.
Cliff, you're going to have to speak up. You've got such a delicate voice. Pat
Buchanan is our lovely science fiction writer called Stela Idea.
Closer to the mic? Okay. Next we have our guest of honor, Marianne Mueller, and
she is the wonderful mad scientist, Dr. Loom. Tell them what Dr. Loom's first
name is. She doesn't have one. Yes, she does. It's Fruit of The, isn't it? Oh,
that's him. You'll get the references. And next to Mary is Mark Bernstein, and
he is our villain, J.G. This is called casting against type, of course. Ha. And
our narrator, Meg Cadleth. And I'm Susie, and I'm Teela Brown, and I don't know
what that is. Teela Brown? You were lucky to get some of that. Oh, gee. Can we
get some more quarterbacks? Oh I'm sorry. Sound effects by Nancy Tucker and they
were all her idea I had nothing to do with that.
Stuck on the shoulder of the road to science fiction. In a small and cluttered
laboratory in Erwan, Kansas, Doctor Loom, a frizzy haired, absent-minded, thick
-lensed, white-jacketed, ever-so-slightly-mad scientist, is conducting
experiments. Bursting into the room, a beautiful but dumb young man, B.B.D.,
skips up to the doctor. Hey, Willman, you're so smart. I wish I could understand
your invention. Don't worry, your pretty little head about it, my sweet little
papaya. Why don't you read your comic book? Dr. Lume turns back to the sparking
panel, while BBD, waiting a few moments to be sure the conversation has ended,
tiptoes gingerly to the high wooden stool in the corner. The massive wooden door
shakes to the beat of a loud, powerful knock. A slightly stooped, hunchbacked
robot with large, protruding eyes leads in a strong, silent, but mildly aberrant
science fiction writer. The robot shambles over to Dr. Loom, hands her a small
white card, and retreats from the laboratory. Good afternoon, Dr. Loom. I am
Stila Ideas, star reporter and brilliant science fiction writer for a stonding
robotics magazine, otherwise known as ARM. I can read that on your card, young
lady. However, I'm a scientific genius and very busy at the moment. I have no
time to fritter away in idle conversation, so if you'll pardon me. Dr. Loom
turns away. Excuse me, doctor. Have you forgotten our appointment to discuss
your latest world-shattering invention? Oh, of course. Do excuse me. I have so
much on my mind. Come over here and let me introduce you to Ego, the electronic
gizmo orienter. Dr. Loom eagerly grabs Stela's beefy bicep and drags her toward
a trapezoidal edifice of gleaming metal. Pulsing lights dot the upper third of
the machine like a theater marquee on opening night. A control panel, arrayed
with a dizzying assortment of dials and switches, protrudes from the center of
the trapezoid. Steele's eyes are immediately drawn, however, to a cylindrical
shaft setting to the right side of the machine. Two words, scrawled in orange
Dayglow letters, straddle the shaft. As you probably know, Ms. Dia, it has long
been my aim in life to bring all people the ineffable ecstasy I've known from
reading science fiction. And I think I finally found the perfect method. From
his stool in the corner, BBD has been surreptitiously glancing at the two women.
Ever since Stila Idea had entered the room, BBD's heart had pounded frantically
and his sculptured hands had perspired. This humble machine you see before you
has the power to alter mainstream fiction by introducing a disjunctive element
into the story, thus changing mundane literature into its highest form, science
fiction!
But how does it work, Doctor? The Doctor launches into a long technical
explanation, which confuses Steela and totally baffles BBD. Do you mean to say
that all I have to do is push this lever to activate the machine? Oh, no, no,
don't touch that. The lever moves both ways. if you push it towards the word
dis, ego will change mundane literature to science fiction. But, if the lever is
in the dis, dis position, science fiction loses its disjunct development and
becomes mundane. Heaven forbid, Doctor, that anyone would ever do such a
dastardly deed. At that moment, the robot appears in the doorway with an
apologetic expression on its chrome face and informs Dr. Loom that an urgent
message has just arrived from Senator Proxmire.
With an exasperated shake of her frizzy head, Dr. Loom leaves, followed by her
faithful robot. Stila, left to her own devices, begins examining the lab,
carefully avoiding contact with the crucial lever. She scans the rack of test
tubes, smoking vials, and moldy Petri dishes. Suddenly, it is as if there were a
spark from across the room Two pairs of eyes meet, and for a moment, time stops
BBD slowly rises from his stool, the comic book slipping from his grasp Stila
rushes forward to retrieve the magazine Pardon me, I think you've dropped this
Stila glances at the cover Gosh, are you a Duck Dodgers fan too? BBD blushes
prettily You'll never believe this, but I have an exquisite collection of Duck
Dodgers holograms in my apartment. If you are free tonight, perhaps I could show
them to you. Gee, I'd love to, but I'm not sure my mother would approve. She
doesn't have to know. Leave the alley door unlocked, and I'll meet you here
tonight. Okay. Later that night, BBD impatiently paces in the laboratory. A soft
scuffling sound from the alley attracts his attention. He throws open the door
and finds himself face to face with a sinister figure Little does he know that
the tall, skinny, leather-booted, black-caped man wearing a wide-brimmed hat
which tilts over his face revealing only a Fu Manchu mustache is the diabolical
J.G. B.B.D. faints With animal cunning, J.G. lifts the crumpled body and
staggers into the alley where waits a large but dumpy mushroom-shaped vehicle.
Across the side of the ship are stenciled the words Chi-Chi Engineers Ringworld
Kansas.
J.G. flings the limp body into the craft and clangs shut the door. He slinks
back to the laboratory. Once inside, he is instinctively drawn toward Ego. He
studies the control panel for a moment, then begins to manipulate dials and
switches. Meanwhile, back outside, our unsuspecting heroine strides confidently
toward the laboratory door. With a keen glance, she takes note of the unusual
vehicle parked inconveniently in the alley. Mildly annoyed, she circles it. She
gently pushes the laboratory door open. J.G., who hears the hinges creak, whips
around only to find himself confronting the cool, clear eyes of Stila Idea. Who
are you and what are you doing? I'm a maintenance representative of Serviceable
Pros, Inc. I'm doing a monthly service check on the disjunctor. Oh, well, have
you seen Mr. Loom's son, B.B.D.? No, and if you'll excuse me, I must be going.
Flipping through a copy of Duck Dodger's, Steela hears a rumble in the alley. It
suddenly hits her. That's funny. That ship belonged to a different company. Who
was that caped man? Stilo rushes outside and sees the mushroom-shaped ship
dwindling in the distance She jumps into a bright red roadster and races after
it through the gateway, over the mainstream across the campus, over the river
and through the woods to the sinister Castle Harlan
Meanwhile, back at the laboratory, a voice filters down from upstairs Is that
you, my little cantaloupe? Little does Dr. Loom know, but her little cantaloupe
is at this moment lying unconscious at the feet of the evil J.G. Curses! I
didn't have time to alter ego
And now that meddling fool has followed me here I've got to take care of her At
this moment, BBD regains consciousness and jumps to his feet I recognize you You
are J.G., my mother's arch enemy Yes, you naive little fool For years, your
mother and I have been competing for control of fiction As soon as I can get rid
of that meddler I will use your mother's machine for my own ends But what's
going to happen to me? You will stay here and do as you're told, if you know
what's good for you. J.G. stalks off the ship, locking the door behind him.
Confused and bewildered, B.B.D. flings himself across the control board and
begins to cry. The ship rumbles. B.B.D. is thrust to the floor by the force of
the acceleration. In a matter of seconds, the ship's engines grind to a halt.
With a sob, B.B.D. faints.
while all this has been happening Stila somehow manages to find a seldom used
secret door to castle Harland she stealthily descends the cold damp stairs and
arrives at a dimly lit passageway light streams through an open door at the far
end of the corridor Stila creeps toward the door cautiously she steps inside she
stares for a moment at the white padded walls of the tiny cubicle directly
opposite the door the wall is lined with dusty shelves holding a plethora of
bottles and in some of the bottles are things the door slams shut the room is
plunged into darkness meanwhile back at the laboratory dr. Loom is frantically
searching for BBD at her wit's end she turns to Ego for help. if I can only
orient ego to the brainwave pattern of BBD? Perhaps he can locate my missing
little grape cluster. Almost instantaneously, a signal light flashes. The
speaker emits a small, frightened voice. Aye? Could it be? Back at Castle
Harlan, Steele pounds at the locked door. A voice booms from somewhere above
her. I hope you enjoy your stay. It will be a long one. Feel free to sample my
wine collection. You really must try the Amontillado. What have you... What have
you done with BBD? But there is no answer. Only the fading echo of demonic
laughter. For the love of God, Montresor! In a fit of emptification, Steelers
sweeps a row of bottles off the shelf. By a fortuitous coincidence, her fingers
brush against a hidden switch. The door swings open. She is free. At this
moment, in the laboratory, the small, frightened voice cries out. Still? Our
scientific genius adjusts numerous dials, frantically attempting to pinpoint her
son's position. Bursting through the door with a robot at her heels, Stila
confronts Dr. Loom. What's going on around here? That's what I'd like to know,
young lady. After lengthy but hurried explanations, Dr. Loom and Stela agree
that Ego is their only hope. We need only one more coordinate to be able to
triangulate BBD's position. At that very moment, the small voice cries out
again. Live? Within a matter of seconds, Ego fixes his position. Armed with this
information, Dr. Loom and Stela rush to the experimental FTL ship parked in a
silo behind the laboratory. Dr. Loom works the controls, and the ship hurtles
into outer space.
Where are we going? To the Crab Nebula. If ego is right, we may have seen the
last of BBD. What do you mean? Don't you know? The center of the Crab Nebula is
a black hole. Stila gasps. By the time Dr. Loom finishes explaining black holes
to Stila, they have arrived.
Stila activates the view screen. Where is he? Do you see that speck out there?
He is orbiting the black hole. There isn't much time. The two women stare at
each other in consternation. Suddenly, a spacesuited figure riding a lumbering,
multi-legged beast appears. An expert in alien biology, Steela recognizes it as
a galloping coincidence. A voice crackles over the speaker. Who are you guys,
anyway? And what are you doing here? This is Dr. Loon, scientific genius. We are
on an urgent rescue mission to save my son from being captured by the black
hole. Who are you? Oh, I'm Tila Brown, and by a stroke of luck, I may be able to
help you. Do you have any ruby red slippers aboard?
Why, I'm wearing some. Listen carefully, then. Close your eyes And click your
heels together three times Whispering the words Come to me, my melancholy baby
Breathlessly, Stela follows the instructions to the letter Instantaneously, BBD
appears at her side Their reunion is brief, but poignant Answering their
pressing questions BBD recounts his conversation with J.G. That diabolical
fiend, he must be stopped. J.G. has not been idle during the rescue operation.
Short-circuiting the robot, he has gained entrance to the laboratory once more,
where he is now in the process of carrying out his evil scheme. Fearing the
worst, Steela and company rush back to the lab. Alas, they are too late. With a
flick of the switch, J.G. sets the machinery into motion. Nothing can stop it
now. In libraries and bookstores across the world, the machine begins subverting
science fiction. Dying inside becomes death of a salesman. Babel 17 turns into
Tristam Shandy. Dune is changed into Lawrence of Arabia. Ringworld becomes the
story of O. And the world of Nalé is transformed into the Scarlet Letter.
But then ego encounters the work of J.G. Billard. The machinery begins to hum
and whine. Sparks fly from the circuit panels. The metal grows hotter and hotter
and the machine begins to tremble and rock. Is J.G. Billard a science fiction
writer? "'Tis twilight, and the machine stops."
Thank you, people. It is now — you appreciate it.